High in this video we're going to continue looking at booleans and in particular we're going to look
at object truth values objects have an associated truth value in Python.
And in fact all objects have an associated truth value.
We saw this in the last video with integers we saw that for example bull of zero would return false
but bhool of one would return true and bhool of any integer other than zero would return true.
And we call that truthiness of integers.
Now to be fair bool is a subclass of.
So we might think that well this really is just a special case.
It only applies to integers because Ball is a subclass of int.
So there's a direct relationship between the two.
But this actually applies to any object in Python.
It works the same way for any object.
And now the rules are pretty straightforward to determining whether an object is going to evaluate as
truthy or falsie the default is that objects evaluate to true but just evaluate to true by default except
in a few cases which are well the non object the non singleton object always evaluates to false the
false singleton object also always evaluates to false.
Probably a good think zero in any numeric type B.
Int float complex decimal.
It doesn't matter if it's 0.
It will evaluate to false if it's non-zero.
It will evaluate to true.
But you were talking about the exceptions.
So if it's zero it will be false.
Empty sequences.
So things like lists of tables or strings if they are empty if they have no elements they will be false.
The same thing with mapping types things like dictionaries or sets of frozen sets.
If they have no elements then they will also evaluate to false and then custom classes.
When we write our own custom classes we can also provide a way to determine how to make the truthiness
of that class of that object.
And that's done by implementing either the Dunder bull method or the done to lend method will take it
that take a look at that in a minute.
And if those returns false are zero then the object will be false.
And so these are the only times when an object will evaluate to false will have an associated truth
value of false.
Otherwise it's going to be true.
So let's take a look under the hood a little closer at how this is a cheap and so classes define the
truth values by defining a special instance method.
The bool method Niva bull method isn't found.
It can also look at the underscore the double underscore Dunder Len method.
So when we call bhool of x where x is an instance of some class then what's actually happening is that
X Python is executing X dot done the bulled under.
So it's trying to execute that method.
If that method exists it will return whatever that method returns.
So that's why we said earlier that in general the way to get our custom object to be falsie is for the
bool method to return false.
That's exactly how we would do it.
Now if it doesn't find the x underscore underscore bool so it will execute the len method instead.
If Ball is not defined so false choice it will try to execute dhanda boom but doesn't find it.
It will try to execute down the line on the object and if that still fails then it's just going to return
true.
So the default is true.
Right so the default truthiness of every object in Python is true unless there is a bull or lend method
that returns false or 0 in which case it will be false.
Now of course if bool returns true or lende return something other than 0 then the associated value
would be true.
So let's take a look at how this might be implemented in the integer class.
So the integer class will define a method called Thunderball and it's an instance method as you can
see we have this parameter self and this is all it does.
It just returns self not equal to zero.
That's the implementation of the done to bool method for ints.
So when we call bool of 100 then Python executes 100 doc done the bull.
It looks at the instance method bool and calls it for this particular instance which was 100.
So it's going to return the result of one hundred not equal to zero.
It evaluates that and of course a 100 is not equal to zero.
So it will return true.
So bhool of 100 is true 100 is truthy.
On the other hand if we call both of 0.
Well Python again executes the ball down the method do for this object.
0 for this instance.
So it's going to look at the result of 0 not equal to zero.
Which of course is going to be false.
0 is equal to zero.
So this would return false and so we would get that bool of 0 would be exactly false.
Right 0 is falsie.
Again we saw that in the previous slide as one of the exceptions to when objects are falsie now we'll
cover this and many other special functions in a later video I'm in the in the course on object or programming
and we'll take a look at all these special functions and we'll actually code them up and and actually
implement those things ourselves.
For now let's just take a look at some of the examples that we have.
So if we take bhool of this list well this list has a lender Underland method it's a sequence type and
the lens is three.
It's not zero.
So the truthiness of three is true.
So all of this non-empty list would be true.
However bhool of this empty list would be false Nabu of the null object is false as well.
Now if we put those two things together.
Let's take a look and just do a little aside and look at the code.
If my list then execute this code block what's happening here is that the code block will execute if
and only if my list is both not known and not empty.
So this is really equivalent to the following code if my list is not done and learn of my list is greater
than zero.
Execute the code block.
These two pieces of code do the same thing.
So you might ask well how is it doing all this in you know in here.
Well we're putting this object inside this if statement.
So this expression here Python knows needs to be a boolean result.
So it's going to look at the truthiness of my list.
It's good to look at the associated truth value of my list if the associated value is true.
It will then execute the code block for it's false it won't.
So how does it evaluate the truth value of my list.
Well if my list is none it's going to be false.
So this code block will not execute if my list is none.
On the other hand suppose my list is not on right that it is a list.
It is a real list that's been instantiated or been created.
Suppose that the length of the list is zero.
In other words it has no elements then bhool of that is going to return false.
So my list will again be falsie and therefore this code block will not execute but if my list is an
actual list instance it's not none.
And if it contains elements also then it will be truthy because the lend is going to be something other
than zero.
It's going to be something like this one up here which means it's going to be true and therefore the
code block will execute.
So this and this are actually totally equivalent.
All right.
So enough of an aside.
Let's go back let's continue.
So if we look at a string ABC.
That's a sequence type.
It has a non-zero character count.
It has a length that's greater than zero.
That's truthy as well an empty string.
On the other hand while 0 elements in the string 0 elements in the sequence that's going to be false
Boolean of as we've seen before is false.
Why.
Well zero is you know the number is 0.
That's always going to be false.
And it doesn't matter if it's a complex number.
If it's zero there will be false as well.
Works the same with decimals.
On the other hand if we have nonzero numbers even negative 1 as we saw in the last video that will be
true.
Same thing with you or a nonzero complex number that will be true.
And same thing over non-zero decimal number.
That will be true as well.
So let's jump into some code and just take a look at this in action and I'll see you in a bit.